We mentioned that it is important to know both how many users saw,
and how many users actually used a feature to understand its success.
It is important to track both metrics because
together the numbers tell us the percentage of
customers who use the feature out of the total number of active users in the time period.
This tells us how widespread the feature usage is among all of the products active users.
But why look at the percent of feature users out of total product users?
Because, just looking at the raw numbers of users can be misleading. Here's an example.
Imagine you launch a new feature in January,
you get 1,000 customers to use it,
and in February you see 2,000 customers use the feature,
that's 100 percent growth.
So the feature is a success.
Right? Not so fast.
Remember, we need to look at the number of
feature users out of the total number of product users.
For example, if the product had over 8 million users in January and February,
the percent of users of the new feature is tiny.
As a product manager,
we need to look at whether users even know this feature exist.
How about if the product had a fewer users?
Well, if in January the product had 3,000
users and in February the product had 10,000 users,
then even though the raw number of users increased,
the feature usage actually dropped among users from
33 percent to 20 percent of product customers.
As a product manager,
we need to do further research to understand why new customers
aren't finding the feature as appealing as customers in the previous month.
Another important metric to consider when evaluating
a feature is the average feature use frequency and duration.
While the percentage of feature users out of
total product users provides an idea of how widespread adoption of the feature is,
measuring frequency usage and duration provides
product managers with data about how the feature is being used.
Metrics around feature usage to
consider are the frequency a user engages with the feature,
such as on average,
how many times per day or week customers use the feature,
and on average, the amount of time customers spend using the feature during each session.
Note that whether the frequency and duration of feature usage are good or bad,
depends entirely on the context of the product and feature.
Let's look at some examples.
Imagine a social media app launches a new feature.
Since a social media app is often used multiple times per day for short bursts of time,
a new popular feature could be used four times a day for two minutes on average.
Compare this to a budgeting software that is typically used by
customers to set a budget and review budget progress at the beginning or end of a month.
For a good new feature in budget software,
a feature might be used only one time a month,
but for 30 minutes in an average session.
Neither of these scenarios shows a feature failing to perform,
but it does offer product managers an idea of how the feature is being
used and in what scenarios it is considered helpful by the customers.
When the frequency and duration don't match product expectations,
or the frequency and duration of similar features already launched in the product,
then this is a sign that further investigation and research is needed.
Now that we've discussed the data we want to collect at
the feature level and the types of questions we should instrument to answer,
let's talk about a few best practices to ensure what and how we instrument goes well.
First, when making decisions on how to build a feature,
keep your data collection needs in mind.
The questions you'll ask to measure a feature success should be
considered as you work with your design and development team to create a feature,
not right when a feature is going into production.
For example, when you launch a product,
as we discussed in the previous slide,
you'll want to know who and how a customer uses a feature.
So any event tracking should always include not just user ID,
but session-based information about the way that users access the feature,
including variables such as device and browser.
Another thing to keep in mind is to ensure
you track separate events for separate user actions.
If a user can do multiple things on a page,
you want to know exactly what they did on that page,
that means tracking each action your users take,
not just where in the product they are.
One way to ensure your instrumentation strategy is sound,
is to test it before launch.
You can do this by simulating the data you might collect and checking if you can
answer every question you'll ask to see if a feature is successful after launch.
Your simulation can even be useful as an example for
the engineers who are instrumenting the feature to check their work against.
Finally, make sure to define and document any new events you create when instrumenting.
Describe exactly how a piece of data is triggered,
products undergo rapid change and something
that seems clear to you today will quickly be forgotten.
Data isn't helpful if you don't know the meaning of the data you have.
The bottom line when instrumenting a feature is to keep your future self in mind.
Think about the questions you'll be asking about
the feature in three months to determine success,
and ensure you're prepared to answer them.